IBX-9846: Describe Embeddings search API (#3029)
ezsystems/developer-documentation: docs/search/embeddings_reference/embeddings_reference.md

---
month_change: true
description: Embedding queries, embedding configuration, providers, and embedding search fields
---

# Embeddings search reference

Embeddings provide vector representations of content or text, enabling [semantic similarity search](search_api.md#search-with-embeddings).
Foundational abstractions are provided for embedding-based search, while embedding providers generate vector representations.

Searching with embeddings is designed for use with the [Taxonomy suggestions](taxonomy.md#taxonomy-suggestions) feature.
The [`Ibexa\Contracts\Taxonomy\Search\Query\Value\TaxonomyEmbedding`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Taxonomy-Search-Query-Value-TaxonomyEmbedding.html) class allows embedding queries to target taxonomy data.

!!! tip

>     Searching with embeddings isn't possible with the Legacy Search engine.

Reviewer: Please see my other comment about the supported search engines - I believe we need to be more specific here.

## Core query objects

### EmbeddingQuery

- [`Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Repository\Values\Content\EmbeddingQuery`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-EmbeddingQuery.html) represents a semantic similarity search request.
    It encapsulates an [Embedding](#embedding) instance and supports pagination, aggregations, and result counting through the same API as standard content queries.

    !!! note "Embedding query properties"

        Embedding queries do not use criteria for similarity, but for additional filtering applied through the query filter. 

>         Also, embedding queries do not allow standard Query properties supported by [search engines](search_engines.md) other than the Legacy Search, such as `query`, `sortClauses`, or `spellcheck` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Also, embedding queries do not allow standard Query properties supported by [search engines](search_engines.md) other than the Legacy Search, such as `query`, `sortClauses`, or `spellcheck`.
```

- [`Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Search\Embedding\EmbeddingProviderInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Search-Embedding-EmbeddingProviderInterface.html) generates embeddings for the provided text or other input

- [`Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Search\Embedding\EmbeddingProviderRegistryInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Search-Embedding-EmbeddingProviderRegistryInterface.html) lists available embedding providers or gets one by its identifier

- [`Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Search\Embedding\EmbeddingProviderResolverInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Search-Embedding-EmbeddingProviderResolverInterface.html) determines the embedding provider to be used for generating embeddings based on the system configuration, or a demand passed through the `resolveByModelIdentifier` method

## Configuration

Models used to resolve embedding queries must be configured per SiteAccess in [system configuration](configuration.md).
Each entry defines the model's name, vector dimensionality, the field suffix, and the embedding provider that generates vectors.

> Field suffixes assigned to the models must be unique, as they becomes part of the indexed field name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Field suffixes assigned to the models must be unique, as they become part of the indexed field name.
```

You select the default model by setting a value in the `default_embedding_model` key.

``` yaml
ibexa:
    system:
        default:
        embedding_models:
            text-embedding-3-small:
                name: 'text-embedding-3-small'
                dimensions: 1536
                field_suffix: '3small'
                embedding_provider: 'ibexa_openai'

>         default_embedding_model: text-embedding-ada-002

Reviewer: Should this part be nested one level deeper, under `default`?

Author: Right as always
https://github.com/ibexa/connector-openai/blob/aeef78ab854135cbf95149b136e9c22ca417e010/src/bundle/Resources/config/prepend.yaml#L19

---
month_change: true
description: Embedding queries, embedding configuration, providers, and embedding search fields
---

# Embeddings search reference

Embeddings provide vector representations of content or text, enabling semantic similarity search.
Foundational abstractions are provided for embedding-based search, while embedding providers generate vector representations.

## EmbeddingQuery

- [`Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Repository\Values\Content\EmbeddingQuery`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-EmbeddingQuery.html): Represents a semantic similarity search request.
It encapsulates an [Embedding](#embedding) instance and supports filtering, pagination, aggregations, and result counting through the same API as standard content queries.
Embedding queries do not support criteria, Sort Clauses, facet builders, or spellcheck

## Embedding

- [`Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Repository\Values\Content\Query\Embedding`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-Query-Embedding.html): Represents the semantic input used for similarity search.

> Depending on the embedding provider, it can encapsulate text or vector data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [`Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Repository\Values\Content\Query\Embedding`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-Query-Embedding.html): Represents the vector input used for similarity search. 
It stores embedding values as float arrays, while providers generate those vectors from text input
```

## Embedding providers

> Embedding providers generate vector representations for inputs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Embedding providers generate vector representations for inputs.
Out of the box, embedding search integration is provided for TaxonomyEmbedding.
If you use a custom embedding value type, implement matching embedding visitors for your search engine (Solr/Elasticsearch).
Otherwise, query execution may fail with "No visitor available".
```

### Provider contracts

- [`Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Search\Embedding\EmbeddingProviderInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Search-Embedding-EmbeddingProviderInterface.html): Generates embeddings

- [`Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Search\Embedding\EmbeddingProviderRegistryInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Search-Embedding-EmbeddingProviderRegistryInterface.html): Lists available embedding providers

- [`Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Search\Embedding\EmbeddingProviderResolverInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Search-Embedding-EmbeddingProviderResolverInterface.html): Resolves the provider for a given embedding configuration

## Embedding fields

- [`Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Search\FieldType\EmbeddingFieldFactory`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Search-FieldType-EmbeddingFieldFactory.html): Creates dedicated search fields that store embedding vectors

## Validation

> - [`Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Repository\Values\Content\QueryValidatorInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-QueryValidatorInterface.html): Validates embedding queries and configurations are validated before reaching the search engine

Reviewer 2: It does not validate configuration. Maybe `Validates embedding queries before they reach the search engine`

> ---

Reviewer: Please link to the search_api page for an example, or just include the example here as well.

In general, there's a lot of duplicated content between these two pages (this one and search_api.md), and it's hard to say which one is the primary one - search api links here for more information, but it's search_api.md that contains more information 🤔 

This one does not include:
1) Description of EmbeddingQueryBuilder
2) Examples

Do we need this page?

month_change: true
description: Embedding queries, embedding configuration, providers, and embedding search fields
---

# Embeddings search reference

Embeddings provide vector representations of content or text, enabling semantic similarity search.
Foundational abstractions are provided for embedding-based search, while embedding providers generate vector representations.

## EmbeddingQuery

- [`Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Repository\Values\Content\EmbeddingQuery`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-EmbeddingQuery.html): Represents a semantic similarity search request.
It encapsulates an [Embedding](#embedding) instance and supports filtering, pagination, aggregations, and result counting through the same API as standard content queries.

> Embedding queries do not support criteria, Sort Clauses, facet builders, or spellcheck

Reviewer: I'd mention the search engines where they are available.

Solr 9, ES, but not Legacy Search?

Reviewer: Faceted searched is removed in v5, and deprecated in v4.6

Let's replace it with aggregations.

Author: However, the constraint is still there:
https://github.com/ibexa/core/pull/536/changes#diff-dc23b4b1b530baaa1bb8a8020a0c113dfcada0d7f12e4cb4d3222fcb88462570R96

Reviewer: Yes, but it's not in v5 - https://github.com/ibexa/core/blob/main/src/contracts/Repository/Values/Content/EmbeddingQuery.php (and with this PR you're targetting v5)

Faceted search is removed in v5, deprecated in 4.6 (aggregations should be used instead)

> Embedding queries do not support criteria, Sort Clauses, facet builders, or spellcheck

Reviewer: > Embedding queries do not support criteria

What does it mean? We say that it supports filtering, and filtering is defined with search criteria?

Reviewer 2: You are right, better would be to write "Criteria are not used to express the embedding similarity part of the query." or "Embedding queries do not use criteria for similarity itself; similarity is defined by the embedded query vector, while additional filtering can still be applied through the query filter."

## Embedding

- [`Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Repository\Values\Content\Query\Embedding`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-Query-Embedding.html): Represents the vector input used
for similarity search.
It stores embedding values as float arrays, while providers generate those vectors from text input

## Embedding providers

Embedding providers generate vector representations for inputs.
Out of the box, embedding search integration is provided for TaxonomyEmbedding.
If you use a custom embedding value type, implement matching embedding
visitors for your search engine (Solr/Elasticsearch).
Otherwise, query execution may fail with "No visitor available".

### Provider contracts

> - [`Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Search\Embedding\EmbeddingProviderInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Search-Embedding-EmbeddingProviderInterface.html): Generates embeddings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Search\Embedding\EmbeddingProviderInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Search-Embedding-EmbeddingProviderInterface.html): Generates embeddings for the provided text
```

> - [`Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Search\Embedding\EmbeddingProviderRegistryInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Search-Embedding-EmbeddingProviderRegistryInterface.html): Lists available embedding providers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Search\Embedding\EmbeddingProviderRegistryInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Search-Embedding-EmbeddingProviderRegistryInterface.html): Lists available embedding providers or get one by its identifier
```

> - [`Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Search\Embedding\EmbeddingProviderResolverInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Search-Embedding-EmbeddingProviderResolverInterface.html): Resolves the provider for a given embedding configuration

Reviewer: Given how? Looking at https://github.com/ibexa/core/blob/d01b203204e4f9bc3bdaced92ade82eff0afbdd3/src/lib/Search/Embedding/EmbeddingProviderResolver.php#L17 , I'd say it's for the default configuration.

```suggestion
- [`Ibexa\Contracts\Core\Search\Embedding\EmbeddingProviderResolverInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Search-Embedding-EmbeddingProviderResolverInterface.html): Resolves the embedding provider based on system configuration
```

You can also mention the `default_embedding_model` configuration property here, as this is what's returned.
